Financial Advice for a 20-year-old


Once you start a job:


Save at least 25% of your gross paycheck. So, if you make $100,000 dollars, save a minimum of $25,000 dollars. 


Out of this, contribute the maximum percentage for which you will get a match into your 401k. So, for example if you have a 5% match save at least 5% of your gross pay. So, $5,000 goes into your 401K. The IRS has a limit of how much you can put in your 401k. In 2020 it is $19,500. 


If you have a Roth 401k, put in the remaining $14,500 ($19,500-$5,000) into your ROTH 401k. 


Save at least $5,000 dollars in cash in an emergency fund or 3 months of living expenses


If you have the HSA plan (Health Savings account) put maximum in it ($3,500 dollars today) while you are young and do not have a lot of health care expenses. You will need it when you get older. Saving in HSA if you have an option available is very important. Do not use the HSA money to pay for your medical expenses yet, and let it grow. Pay out of pocket and scan and save your receipts. You can claim the money much much later. HSA money can be taken out at 65 and used for anything without any penalty just like an IRA at 59 1/2. You just pay taxes. If you use HSA money for medical expenses it can be taken out both tax and penalty free any time.


Based on your marginal tax rates you have the option of deciding if you want to put more in regular 401K and less in ROTH 401K. Make a choice here. The more you put in a regular 401K the more taxes you can save today. But you will have to pay more in taxes when you retire, and taxes are going to be inevitably higher then. So, my suggestion is to pay taxes now when you do not make a lot of money and when the tax rates are low.


The next step is to save in the Roth IRA. In 2020 you can put in $6,000 in the ROTH IRA. Based on your “Maximum Adjustable Gross Income (MAGI)” you might or might not be eligible for contributing to a ROTH IRA. Check the tax code if you are eligible or not. If you are eligible, invest the maximum in ROTH IRA after you have maxed out your 401K/ROTH 401K. 


If you are not eligible to invest in a Roth IRA based on your earned income, put your money ($6,000 today) in a traditional after-tax IRA. You can then convert this money into a ROTH IRA. 
Always keep up with the tax code. You will need to look it up as to how to accomplish this.


Order of Savings
Here should be your order of your savings:
* Emergency Fund of 3 months of expenses
* 401K up to the company match
* HSA up to the limit ($3500 for single and $7100 for married today)
* Roth 401K (if available) up to IRS limit or regular 401K to the limit (total of 401K + Roth 401K of 19500 today)
* Roth IRA if your income allows it (tax code dependent), if not traditional IRA and convert to Roth
* 529 for yourself until you have kids and transfer it to a kids name after you have kids.
* Taxable brokerage account
Once you have kids, invest a dollar a day starting from their birth in a mutual fund in a UTMA/UGMA account. Also invest in a 529 plan for their education. 


Asset Allocation


Until you are 40
* 60% Total US stock market index fund (Includes large cap and small cap like VTSAX or VTI as you are doing today)
* 20% Total International Stock Fund like VGTSX
* 10% small cap US (VB)
* 10% REIT (VNQ)
Rebalance every year so the percentages remain the same. When you are rebalancing, look at your entire portfolio across all accounts as one unit and rebalance.  You might be limited in options for investment in your 401K accounts. Work around those funds that are available in your 401K.


When you change jobs, rollover your 401K into an IRA and Roth 401K into a Roth IRA. 


Make sure it is a trustee-to-trustee rollover directly and do not take a distribution. If they send you a check make sure you deposit it in your IRA within 60 days. 






After turning 40


Start moving 3% of your portfolio into a bond fund every year so by the time you are 50 you will have 70% stocks and 30% bonds. Allocate the bond portfolio to a diversified bond index like the Total Bond market index (BND or AGG). If you get a good yield on CDs compared to a bond fund like AGG use the 30% to diversify between bonds and CDs.


Taxes
Keep in mind tax drag on investments is about 1.5% in loss of return. Always, always keep up with the tax code. When your marginal tax rate gets to 24% or above then switch from saving into Roth 401K to regular 401K. In your tax-deferred accounts (401K, Roth 401K, Traditional IRA and Roth IRA) tax drag does not matter. It matters in taxable accounts and turnover in a given fund matters. The higher turnover is in a given fund or ETF the more you will play when you use this fund or ETF in a taxable account. 


Asset Location
Asset location is just as important as asset allocation to minimize taxes. Keep asset types like Bonds, Precious Metals, REITs etc. in tax advantaged accounts (Roth 401k, Roth IRA, 401K). These types of investments could give off dividends and capital gains that are typically taxed as ordinary income and do not get a favorable tax treatment like stock funds and ETFs. 


Expense Ratio of Funds and ETFS
High expense ratio funds/ETFs cause an excessive drag on your returns. So, invest in broadly diversified index funds with lower expense ratios.


Insurance
Get term life insurance while you are young. Try to get the longest term (20 years +). Keep buying term life until you think you do not need insurance and you can fund it yourself. Whole life insurance with cash value stuff is not worth it.  But if you get a good IRR (Internal rate of Return) you can use it. You do not need to buy Insurance until you determine someone else is dependent on your income. Do not fall into the trap of using “Index Universal Life” annuities, “Variable Universal Life” annuities etc. These vehicles are complex, difficult to understand and come with a lot of fees. The tax savings they show are not what you want. If you ever want to buy an annuity buy a single premium immediate annuity (SPIA), only before you retire. 


Credit Cards and Expenses
Make sure you keep track of your expenses. Pay off your credit cards every month. Make sure you do not carry credit card balances. The interest rates are really really high and you will pay a lot in the long term. 


Beneficiary Designations
Make sure beneficiary designations are set properly on all your financial accounts. Revisit beneficiary designations if your life situation changes.


Just like no one can predict what the stock market does in terms of volatility no one can predict what long term interest rates do either. So do not try to time the stock market or the interest rates. Do not chase yields in the bond market. Bonds are for stability (reducing volatility) and not necessarily for yield. So, your bond portfolio should be a risk dampener, not adding additional risk. Always look at the total return (capital gains + dividends) on a stock ETF or a Mutual fund and decide.
Having uncorrelated assets in your portfolio will help when a particular asset class goes down. Although it is almost impossible to have perfectly uncorrelated assets. 


During your lifetime of investment, the stock market is going to drop 30% or more at least 3 times. Do not panic and DO NOT SELL your mutual fund/ETF investments because you panicked. You are just locking in your losses by selling. 


Always remember that it is “Time In” the market and not “Timing” the market that will make you wealthy.


Also, the more complex an investment instrument is, the less money you will make. So, keep your personal financial life simple and do not chase complex financial instruments.


DO NOT chase the hot thing that is going on. Today it is Bitcoin or Tesla. Tomorrow it might be something else. If you ever get into a mode of fear of missing out, just put in less than 2% of your portfolio into the hottest thing, but not more than that. 


All this rambling is based on the situation today, but I am sure a lot of things are going to change. Keep investing and do not gamble on your savings. You will do well.